Cities, by their very nature, they seem
well, like the opposite of nature.
Dense populations of humans paving over
the landscape with asphalt and concrete
doesn't exactly bring sustainability to
mind. But, it turns out that living in
cities is one of the best ways we can
protect the environment. I know that
sounds unintuitive, but it's true. It's
better to have people living closer
together than spread across the
countryside using up precious farm and
natural areas. People who live in cities
closer together also travel less burning
less fossil fuels. That said, humans in
cities also have been responsible for
some horrible environmental outcomes. We
need to make cities more sustainable to
help protect the surrounding environment
and the planet. What would it take for
your city to be sustainable? Today,
we're going to learn about
sustainability and urban planning, where
we explore how the cities we live in can
transform not only our environment, but
also our lives for the better. Let's get
into it after the bike bell.
>> [bell]
>> Before we discuss how cities are
becoming more sustainable, it's
important to understand what
sustainability means in the first place.
While sustainable may sound like a
buzzword to you at this point, thanks to
its constant use, let's actually look at
the definition. The most often quoted
definition comes from the UN World
Commission on Environment and
Development, and it says, "Sustainable
development is development that meets
the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs."
Our resources need to sustain us through
generations, so we can't use too much
right now.
A sustainable mindset advocates for
responsible use of resources to maintain
and enhance the health of our planet and
the quality of life for all its
inhabitants. You can see here that
sustainability brings together multiple
disciplines, including environmental,
social, and economic concerns. It's the
famous three E's model that you may have
seen before.
But, this is an urban planning video, so
let's talk about cities. Sustainable
planning prioritizes the efficient use
of resources, minimizing waste, reducing
environmental impact, and adapting to
mitigating threats from climate change.
We're talking about green buildings,
renewable energy, and lush green spaces.
These things can become a reality
through concerted advocacy and local
codes and ordinances. Sustainable
planning doesn't have to be a reaction
to climate change. It can also be a
response to the city's natural
environment. In desert cities, for
instance, it's important that a
sustainable source of water is found or
that water recycling is implemented.
It's all about making cities awesome
places to live while saving the planet.
Now, I know I started this video by
telling you that cities are good for the
environment, but that wasn't always the
case. Not that long ago,
developers could build structures out of
harmful materials, factories could spew
unmonitored waste into the skies, and
cities didn't have to hold themselves or
businesses accountable for pollution.
Actually, one of the things that spurred
suburban development in the first place
was the dirty and unsanitary conditions
most inner cities had reached in the
early 20th century. The idea of making
cities cleaner and creating better
health for its citizens isn't anything
new. In the early 1910s, Dr. Alice
Hamilton, one of the founders of the
famous Hull House, created a commission
with the government of Illinois and
later the Department of Commerce to
prove that city dwellers were suffering
from industrial waste and lead
poisoning. Later, in 1962, Rachel Carson
published Silent Spring, which explained
to Americans how chemical pesticide
runoff was killing off species at an
alarming rate. But, environmentalism
didn't really kick off until the fateful
year 1969.
On June 22nd, the Cuyahoga River in
Cleveland caught fire. River fires
weren't actually a novelty, with
industrial waste catching a light in
cities across the nation. However, the
Cuyahoga fire caught the nation's
attention, earning an article in Time
magazine later that month. This,
combined with a massive oil spill near
Santa Barbara earlier that year,
galvanized the nation to begin demanding
accountability for industry and the
natural environment. These events led to
the celebration of the first Earth Day
in 1969.
Congress passed the National
Environmental Policy Act later that
year, and it was signed by President
Nixon on January 1st, 1970.
The act created the now well-known
Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA,
which was given the task of implementing
and monitoring the cleanup of America's
waterways and improving air quality.
Today, our cities enjoy air and water
quality similar to pre-industrial
standards without having destroyed
businesses. Instead, industries are
required to filter their waste with
filtration and scrubbers before
releasing it. In recent years, advocates
and the government have turned their
attention to climate change and
environmental justice.
In 1982, residents of Warren County,
North Carolina held protests after the
government began planning for a toxic
dump site in their area. The EPA began
to study the proposed sites and found
that all of them were located in either
majority black or low-income areas. In
response to mounting evidence that cases
like this were not an exception, George
H.W. Bush created the Office of
Environmental Justice within the EPA in
1992. President Clinton expanded this
program, mandating that all federal
agencies consider environmental justice
in their policies. Today, many cities
have a greater focus on environmental
justice, as well as becoming more
sustainable overall. Local jurisdictions
have been in line with numerous EPA
regulations like the Clean Air Act, and
can even apply to grant programs like
Greening America's Communities for
project funding. Check out how the EPA
helped Little Rock, Arkansas redo their
downtown with bioswales to clean and
retain stormwater. Bioswales can reduce
the chance of a combined sewer overflow,
where rainwater floods a wastewater
treatment plant, forcing raw sewage into
rivers. Gross. Let's transition to some
of the tools environmental planners use
to achieve sustainability goals. This is
by no means an exhaustive list, but they
are intended to show how different
approaches are needed to really maximize
positive outcomes. We're going to start
at the federal government level with
something called environmental impact
statements, or EISs for short. These are
reports that must be produced by federal
agencies anytime a project could cause
significant environmental harm. These
documents are meant to disclose those
potential impacts and propose ways to
mitigate the impacts, if possible.
An EIS doesn't prevent the government
from harming the environment, but it's a
tool decision-makers can use to
understand the potential scope of the
harm and potentially pursue alternatives
to that harmful action. Some states like
California have additional environmental
regulations similar to the federal EIS
processes, but at the state level
instead of the federal level. These
would cover projects without a federal
component. While disclosing and
mitigating environmental harm is good,
they can sometimes be used to prevent
the development of new housing.
Opponents can use these sometimes
onerous environmental assessment
processes to delay the project. This is
greatly simplifying a very complex
issue, but what you need to know is that
they're disclosure documents meant for
public decision-making. Climate action
plans, or CAPs, are set of policies that
cities can adopt to advance their
sustainability goals through direct
action. The CAP can specify which
climate-related issues are most likely
to affect the city. For coastal cities,
this may be sea level rise, while for
cities in the south it might be extreme
heat. Next, some CAPs have a carbon
inventory, where the sources of
greenhouse gases within the city are
listed and the amounts are calculated.
This gives the plan a baseline amount of
carbon emissions and lets the city set a
reduction target. Next comes the meat of
the plan, the goals, strategies, and
implementing actions. A goal may be to
cut transportation emissions by 20%,
lower emissions from buildings, or
create more biodiversity. The strategies
will be actions the city can take to
actually reach those goals, and the
implementing actions are ways the city
can do it.
Here's a good example. The Houston
Climate Action Plan acknowledges that
Houston is a car-centric city with 94%
of trips made by car. One of their goals
is to reduce vehicle miles traveled to
20% per capita by 2050. Their main
strategies to achieve this goal are to
implement integrated multimodal
transportation systems and build and
retrofit complete transit-oriented
neighborhoods. The implementation
actions to carry out these strategies
are more specific. For the first goal,
they include coordinate regional transit
operations and payment systems,
prioritize funding mechanisms towards
multimodal transportation, and expand
the use of micro-mobility devices. These
are like rentable e-scooters.
You can see that next to each
implementation action, the CAP lists the
time frame, whether or not it's a new
policy or financial support will be
needed, and whether they actually will
be community- or city-led. This type of
organizational structure, zooming in
from the big picture goal of reducing
emissions to more specific strategies,
to even more specific implementing
actions, is helpful to both the public
to understand how their city's becoming
more sustainable, and for the city to
meaningfully change.
Breaking down the climate change
response into bite-size actions helps
ensure that things will really get done.
The last section of many CAPs is called
monitoring. Here, the city explains how
they'll keep track of the implementation
and find out whether or not they're
actually working. In Houston's case,
city planners will need to measure that
every year they hit their VMT reduction
targets of 20% by 2050.
Monitoring is often where some CAPs fall
short. It's easy to propose changes, but
harder to track their progress and
change them mid-course. Can especially
be true for smaller cities, who may have
the may not have the resources to keep
track of every single strategy. At the
end of the day, to make sure that a
city's CAP doesn't end up simply sitting
on a shelf in city hall, the public
needs to push their politicians to pass
policies to bring their strategies to
reality. Okay, let's talk about the next
sustainability strategy. Growth
management is all about making conscious
decisions regarding how and where a city
grows. Growth patterns that emphasize
compact, walkable, and transit-friendly
communities are generally better for the
environment because they reduce the
communities' use of cars that produce
emissions.
Growth management can also protect
vulnerable habitat and ag lands.
One smart growth strategy implemented by
some cities is an urban growth boundary.
The concept is that an entire urban
region draws a line around itself. The
line allows for a certain amount of
space within it, sometimes a 15- to
20-year supply of land,
but no new development can occur outside
the boundary. This forces an urban
region to develop in an orderly, compact
way. I actually made a whole video on
UGBs if you want to learn more about
this concept. While EISs, CAPs, and UGBs
look at the big picture, wow, that's a
lot of acronyms, cities are enacting all
sorts of specific legislation to ensure
they continue to become more
sustainable. Many cities are focusing on
transportation as it's the largest
sector of emissions in in most places,
often being the source of around 40% of
greenhouse gas emissions. Some cities
like Philadelphia see EVs as an answer
to this problem. In 2021, the city
adopted their Clean Fleet Plan, which
aims to transition the entire city-owned
vehicle fleet to electric vehicles.
The The explains the importance of this
choice, citing the fact that 13% of all
municipal emissions are from their
vehicle fleet alone. Other cities have
been focusing on creating more green
buildings. Other than transportation,
the construction and maintenance of
structures can often be a huge source of
carbon emissions. This is due to the
manufacturing processes of the materials
like concrete, as well as a building's
everyday functions from heating to
lighting. That's why many cities caps
include green building standards,
mandating new structures use LED light
bulbs, efficient insulation, heating and
cooling systems regulated by design, or
no gas-powered appliances. There are
standards for these things. You may have
noticed LEED silver, gold, or platinum
plaques in the lobbies of buildings
you've been in.
These are awards given to buildings that
show leadership in energy and
environmental design, or LEED, the
world's most widely used green building
rating system. LEED provides a framework
for architects and developers to build
healthy, highly efficient, cost-saving
green buildings. Cities can have a
significant impact on the environment,
but well-designed cities can actually
minimize the harm humans do to our
planet.
We have developed many rules and
regulations, plans, and strategies to
make more clean, healthy, efficient, and
verdant cities.
These come from the federal government
level on down to local climate action
planning.
This area of planning continues to
evolve as our climate does, and we begin
to feel the tangible impacts of climate
change.